improve concepts event handlers (#560)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: src/routes/concepts/components/event-handlers.mdx

## Binding events

To optimize event handlers, you can pass an array as the event handler, replacing the function.
When doing this, the second item passed into the array is supplied as the handler's first argument:

```tsx
const handler = (data, event) => {
	console.log("Data:", data, "Event:", event);
};

<button onClick={[handler, "Hello!"]}>Click Me</button>;
```

In this example, the `Hello!` string is passed as the `data` parameter in the `handler` function when the button is clicked.

By binding events in this way, Solid avoids the overhead of using JavaScript's [bind](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Function/bind) method and adding an additional closure.

### Dynamic Handlers

An event handler does not form part of the reactive system.
If you were to pass the handler as a signal, it will not respond to the changes of that signal.
In other words, events do not dynamically update, and the bindings are not reactive.
This is because attaching and detaching listeners is a resource-intensive task.

Since event handlers are called like a standard function, you can design them to call a reactive source, if needed.

> In the following example, `handleClick` represents a prop that
> has the flexibility to adopt any function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, `handleClick` represents a prop that has the flexibility to adopt any function.
```

By keeping the number of event listeners to a minimum, events can be captured more effectively.
This is especially useful when working with a large number of elements, such as in a table or list.

Supported events such as `click`, `input` and `keydown` are just a few examples that are optimized in this way.
To view the full list see the [references below](#list-of-delegated-events).

If you need to attach an event listener to an element that is not supported by Solid's event delegation, such as a custom event in a [custom element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_custom_elements), you can use the [`on:__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on-and-oncapture) form.

```tsx
<div on:customEvent={handleCustomEvent} />
```

### Event delegation considerations

While delegated events provide some performance enhancements, there are tradeoffs.

Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX Tree, rather than the DOM Tree.
This can differ from the previous expectations of how events work and flow.

Some things to keep in mind include:

> - Delegated event listeners are added _once_ per event type and handle all future events of that type. This means that delegated event listeners remain active even if the element that added them and its handler is removed.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Delegated event listeners are added _once_ per event type and handle all future events of that type. 
This means that delegated event listeners remain active even if the element that added them and its handler is removed.
```

  For example, if a `div` listens for `mousemove` and is later removed, the `mousemove` events will still be dispatched to the `document` in case a different element is also listening for mouse moves.

```tsx
<div onMouseMove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Ocassional Events">

Rather than using delegated events for events that happen infrequently, **native events** are a better solution.

> Since these events happen in specific circumstances, they do not benefit from the performance improvements of event delegation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since these events happen in specific circumstances, they do not benefit from the performance improvements you get with event delegation.
```

```tsx
<div on:mousemove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

</Callout>

- `event.stopPropogation()` does not work as expected since events are attached to the `document` rather than the `element`.

> With cases like this, a native event is recommended.
> As an example, using a native event would stop the following event from reaching the `div native` handler, which is _not_ the case for delegated events.
> You can [view this example in the Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/c5346f84-01e4-4080-8ace-4443ffd0bb10).

Reviewer: In the site it's formatted as if it's unrelated - I added some spaces because I think it will indent it ??? Before I merge I need to double check this one

```suggestion
     With cases like this, a native event is recommended.
     As an example, using a native event would stop the following event from reaching the `div native` handler, which is _not_ the case for delegated events.
     You can [view this example in the Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/c5346f84-01e4-4080-8ace-4443ffd0bb10).
```

// Button clicked
div native
button
```

You can solve this by switching the `button` event to using a native event:

```tsx ins="on:click"
// ...
<button
	on:click={(event) => {
		event.stopPropagation();
		console.log("button");
	}}
>
	button
</button>
// ...
```

```shellsession title="Console output"
// Button clicked
button
```

[See how this solution differs in the Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/9e2deddc-2e83-4ac2-8ee0-49c7c3a45d11).

- Portals propagate events following the _component tree_ and not the _DOM tree_, making them easier to use.
  This means when a `Portal` gets attached to the `body`, any events will propagate up to the `container`.

```tsx
<div class="container" onInput={() => console.log("portal key press")}>
	<Portal mount={document.body}>
		<input onInput={() => console.log("input key press")} />
	</Portal>
</div>
```

<Callout type="info" title="onInput / onChange">

    `onChange` and `onInput` events work according to their native behavior:
    - `onInput` will fire immediately after the value has changed
    - In `<input>` fields, `onChange` will only fire after the field loses focus.

</Callout>

> ## Delegated Events

Reviewer 2: @titoBouzout @LadyBluenotes shouldn't this be a subheader under "Event delegation"?

```suggestion
### Delegated Events
```

Reviewer 2: Also maybe switch to "List of delegated events"?

```tsx
<button on:Custom-Event={handleClick}>Click me</button>
```

For typing `Custom-Event` the TypeScript page has a section about [Event Handlers Types](/configuration/typescript#event-handling).

## Binding events

In Solid, as an optimization, event handlers can be bound by passing an array as the event handler, instead of a function.
The second item of the array, in this case `data`, is supplied as the handler's first argument.

```tsx
const handler = (data, event) => {
	console.log("Data:", data, "Event:", event);
};

<button onClick={[handler, "Hello!"]}>Click Me</button>;
```

In this example, the string `'Hello!'` is passed as the `data` parameter when the button is clicked.

By binding events in this way, Solid avoids the overhead of using the JavaScript's [bind](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Function/bind) method and an aditional closure.

### Dynamic Handlers

A handler won't form part of the reactive system.
For example passing the handler as a signal won't have any effect on the handler if the signal changes.

The reason for this is that attaching and detaching listeners is a costly process.

> In other words, events are never rebound and the bindings are not reactive.

Reviewer 2: @LadyBluenotes this is a nice improvement to the wording/order, the only thing that feel a bit off is "events do not dynamically adjust", could we say "event handlers do not dynamically update" instead?

cc @titoBouzout

This means that event listeners are attached to the `document` element, and dispatched to the relevant elements as the event bubbles up.

By keeping the number of event listeners to a minimum, events can be captured more effectively.
This is especially useful when working with a large number of elements, such as in a table or list.

Supported events such as `click`, `input` and `keydown` are just a few examples that are optimized in this way.
To view the full list see the [references below](#delegated-events).

If you need to attach an event listener to an element that is not supported by Solid's event delegation, such a custom event in a [Custom Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_custom_elements), you can use the [`on:__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on-and-oncapture) form.

```tsx
<div on:customEvent={handleCustomEvent} />
```

### Event delegation considerations

While delegated events provide some performance enhancements, it comes with some tradeoffs that should be considered.

> <Callout type="info" title="Design">

Reviewer 2: @titoBouzout @LadyBluenotes the closing </Callout> will also need to be removed

> <Callout type="info" title="Design">

Reviewer 2: Oh nvm, I see it in the next change

    Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX Tree, rather than the DOM Tree.

> </Callout>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX Tree, rather than the DOM Tree.
> 
> </Callout>
> 
> This differs from the acquired expectations one may have over how events work and flow.
> 
> Here is a list of peculiarities to keep in mind:
> 
> 1. Delegated event listeners are added to the `document` once per event type.
>    When the element/component that added it is removed, it's handler function will no longer be called, but the delegated event listener will still be present on the `document`.
>    Considering the following example, a `div` listening for `mousemove`.
>    `mousemove` will still be dispatched to the `document` even if the `div` is disposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX Tree, rather than the DOM Tree.
This can differ from the previous expectations of how events work and flow.
Some things to keep in mind include:
- Delegated event listeners remain active even if the element that added them is removed. 
For example, if a `div` listens for `mousemove` and is later removed, the `mousemove` events will still be dispatched to the `document`. 
What this means is that the listener persists even after the originating element or component is disposed.
```

Reviewer 2: @LadyBluenotes I think these lines

> Delegated event listeners are added to the `document` once per event type. When the element/component that added it is removed, it's handler function will no longer be called, but the delegated event listener will still be present on the `document`.

are useful for understanding how it behaves. They give a bit more context as to why it will still remain even once the element that added it is removed, and gives some clarity that it is the delegated event listener only and not the handler that created it will persist. I actually think they way I wrote this wasn't enough and kinda wish there was even more context. I feel like just saying the delegated event listener persists doesn't paint a clear picture of how and why it behaves this way.

Maybe this wording could be used instead as a compromise? 

```suggestion
Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX Tree, rather than the DOM Tree.
This can differ from the previous expectations of how events work and flow.
Some things to keep in mind include:
 - Delegated event listeners remain active even if the element that added them is removed. 
For example, if a `div` listens for `mousemove` and is later removed, the `mousemove` events will still be dispatched to the `document`. 
Delegated event listeners are added _once_ per event type and handle all events of that type. Once setup, the delegated event listener will call the handlers attached to any existing elements, but the listener itself will persist even if all elements with that handler type are removed.
```

cc @titoBouzout

Author: ok, I will merge both suggestions but edit the last sentence because it's slightly repetitive.  I will edit locally and post a new comment

```tsx
<div onMouseMove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Ocassional Events">

>     Consider using Native Events instead of Delegated Events for rare or ocassional events that happen on special circumstances and won't benefit from the performance improvements of event delegation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than using delegated events for events that happen infrequently, **native events** are a better solution.
Since these events happen in specific circumstances, they do not benefit from the performance improvements of event delegation.
```

```tsx
<div on:mousemove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

</Callout>

> 2. When in need to `stopPropagation` use a Native Event instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `event.stopPropogation()` does not work as expected since events are attached to the `document` rather than the `element`.
```

>    `event.stopPropagation()` won't work as expected as the event is attached to the `document` instead of to the `element`.
>    Considering the following example.
>    Using a Native Event would have stopped the event from reaching the `div native` handler.
>    This is not the case for Delegated Events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With cases like this, a native event is recommended.
As an example, using a native event would stop the following event from reaching the `div native` handler, which is _not_ the case for delegated events.
You can [view this example in the Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/c5346f84-01e4-4080-8ace-4443ffd0bb10).
```

```tsx
onMount(() => {
	ref.addEventListener("click", () => {
		console.log("div native");
	});
});
<div ref={ref}>
	<button
		onClick={(event) => {
			event.stopPropagation();
			console.log("button");
		}}
	>
		button
	</button>
</div>;
```

```shellsession title="Console output"
// Button clicked
div native
button
```

> Live Example on [Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/c5346f84-01e4-4080-8ace-4443ffd0bb10)
> 
> This can be solved by switching the `button` event to use a Native Event as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can solve this by switching the `button` event to using a native event:
```

```tsx ins="on:click"
// ...
<button
	on:click={(event) => {
		event.stopPropagation();
		console.log("button");
	}}
>
	button
</button>
// ...
```

```shellsession title="Console output"
// Button clicked
button
```

> Live Example on [Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/9e2deddc-2e83-4ac2-8ee0-49c7c3a45d11)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[See how this solution differs in the Solid Playground](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/9e2deddc-2e83-4ac2-8ee0-49c7c3a45d11).
```

> 3. Even when the following `Portal` gets attached to the `body`, the event on the `input` element will still propagate up to the `container`.
>    Because Portals propagate events following the _Component Tree_, not the _DOM Tree_.
>    This provides the benefit that makes Portals easier to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Portals propagate events following the _component tree_ and not the _DOM tree_, making them easier to use.
This means when a `Portal` gets attached to the `body`, any events will propagate up to the `container`.
```

```tsx
<div class="container" onInput={() => console.log("portal key press")}>
	<Portal mount={document.body}>
		<input onInput={() => console.log("input key press")} />
	</Portal>
</div>
```

<Callout type="info" title="onInput / onChange">

>     `onChange` and `onInput` work according to their native behavior.
>     `onInput` will fire immediately after the value has changed; for `<input>` fields, `onChange` will only fire after the field loses focus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `onChange` and `onInput` events work according to their native behavior:
    - `onInput` will fire immediately after the value has changed
    - In `<input>` fields, `onChange` will only fire after the field loses focus.
```

order: 3
---

Event handlers are functions that are called in response to specific events
occurring in the browser, such as when a user clicks or taps on an element.

Solid provides two ways to add event listeners to the browser. Using the
[`on:__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on-and-oncapture) form, which will add an
event listener to the `element`, known as a _Native Event_. Using the
[`on__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on_) form, which will add an event listener
to the `document` and dispatch it to the `element`, known as a _Delegated
Event_.

The reasons for the two forms are performance and design. Delegated Events flow
through the _Component Tree_, and save some resources performing better on
commonly used events, while Native Events flow through the _DOM Tree_ and allow
more control of the behavior of the event. Check

> [`event delegation peculiarities`](#event-delegation-peculiarities) for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[event delegation peculiarities](#event-delegation-peculiarities) for
```

necessary you can write your handlers to call a reactive source.

In the following example, `handleClick` represents a prop that could dynamically
change its value to any function you wish, so there's no inherent need for them
to be reactive.

```tsx
<div onClick={() => props.handleClick?.()} />
```

</Callout>

## Event delegation

Instead of attaching event listeners to every individual element, Solid uses
(via the regular [`on__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on_) form), what's known as
_synthetic event delegation_. This means that event listeners are attached to
the `document` element, and dispatched to the relevant elements as the event
bubbles up.

By keeping the number of event listeners to a minimum, events can be captured
more effectively. This is especially useful when working with a large number of
elements, such as in a table or list.

Supported events such as `click`, `input` and `keydown` are just a few examples
that are optimized in this way. To view the full list see the
[references below](#delegated-events).

If you need to attach an event listener to an element that is not supported by
Solid's event delegation, such a custom event in a

> [`Custom Element`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_custom_elements),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Custom Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_custom_elements),
```

you can use the [`on:__`](/reference/jsx-attributes/on-and-oncapture) form.

```tsx
<div on:customEvent={handleCustomEvent} />
```

### Event delegation peculiarities

While delegated events provide some performance enhancements, it comes with some
tradeoffs that should be considered.

 <Callout type="info" title="Design">

> Event delegation it's also designed for event propagation through the JSX tree,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Event delegation is designed for event propagation through the JSX tree,
```

rather than the DOM tree.

</Callout>

This differs from the acquired expectations one may have over how events work
and flow.

Here is a list of peculiarities to keep in mind:

1.  Delegated event listeners are added to the `document` once per event type.
    When the element/component that added it is removed, it's handler function
    will no longer be called, but the delegated event listener will still be

>     present in the `document`. Considering the following example, a `div`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    present on the `document`. Considering the following example, a `div`
```

    listening for `mousemove`. `mousemove` will still be dispatched to the
    `document` even if the `div` is disposed.

```tsx
<div onMouseMove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Ocassional Events">
Consider using Native Events instead of Delegated Events for rare or ocassional events that happen on special circumstances and won't benefit from the performance improvements of event delegation.

```tsx
<div on:mousemove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

>   </Callout>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</Callout>
```

2. When in need to `stopPropagation` use a Native Event instead.
   `event.stopPropagation()` won't work as expected as the event is attached to
   the `document` instead of to the `element`.

   Considering the following example. Using a Native Event would have stopped
   the event from reaching the `div native` handler. This is not the case for
   Delegated Events.

```tsx
onMount(() => {
  ref.addEventListener("click", () => {
    console.log("div native");
  });
});
<div ref={ref}>
  <button
    onClick={(event) => {
      event.stopPropagation();
      console.log("button");
    }}
  >
    button
  </button>

> </div>;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</div>
```

```

This can be solved by switching the `button` event to use a Native Event as
follows:

> ```tsx

Reviewer 2: This will mark/highlight the change, just makes it a little more obvious
```suggestion
```tsx ins="on:click"
```

// ...
<button
  on:click={(event) => {
    event.stopPropagation();
    console.log("button");
  }}
>
  button
</button>
// ...
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion

```shellsession
// Button clicked
button
```

Here is a [Solid Playground Example](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/9e2deddc-2e83-4ac2-8ee0-49c7c3a45d11)

````

3. Even when the following `Portal` gets attached to the `body`, the event on
   the `input` element will still propagate up to the `container`. Because
   Portals propagate events following the _Component Tree_, not the _DOM Tree_.
   This provides the benefit that makes Portals easier to use.

```tsx
<div class="container" onInput={() => console.log("portal key press")}>
  <Portal mount={document.body}>
    <input onInput={() => console.log("input key press")} />
  </Portal>
</div>
```

<Callout type="tip" title="onInput / onChange">

Note that `onChange` and `onInput` work according to their native behavior.
`onInput` will fire immediately after the value has changed; for `<input>`
fields, `onChange` will only fire after the field loses focus.

>   </Callout>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</Callout>
```

    present on the `document`. Considering the following example, a `div`
    listening for `mousemove`. `mousemove` will still be dispatched to the
    `document` even if the `div` is disposed.

```tsx
<div onMouseMove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Ocassional Events">
Consider using Native Events instead of Delegated Events for rare or ocassional events that happen on special circumstances and won't benefit from the performance improvements of event delegation.

```tsx
<div on:mousemove={handleCustomEvent} />
```

</Callout>

2. When in need to `stopPropagation` use a Native Event instead.
   `event.stopPropagation()` won't work as expected as the event is attached to
   the `document` instead of to the `element`.

   Considering the following example. Using a Native Event would have stopped
   the event from reaching the `div native` handler. This is not the case for
   Delegated Events.

```tsx
onMount(() => {
  ref.addEventListener("click", () => {
    console.log("div native");
  });
});
<div ref={ref}>
  <button
    onClick={(event) => {
      event.stopPropagation();
      console.log("button");
    }}
  >
    button
  </button>
</div>;
```

> ```shellsession

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```shellsession title="Console output"
````

// Button clicked
div native
button
```

Here is a
[Solid Playground Example](https://playground.solidjs.com/anonymous/c5346f84-01e4-4080-8ace-4443ffd0bb10)

This can be solved by switching the `button` event to use a Native Event as
follows:

```tsx ins="on:click"
// ...
<button
  on:click={(event) => {
    event.stopPropagation();
    console.log("button");
  }}
>
  button
</button>
// ...
```

> ```shellsession

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```shellsession title="Console output"
````
